CARD_TROUBLESHOOTING.md, before:

# Climate Scheduler Card Not Found

The most common problem folks seem to see with this is the card not being found after installation, it's a bit hit and miss as to when this occurs and has been a pain to try and fix. 

Steps to troubleshoot:
1. Visit the [integrations](http://homeassistant.local:8123/config/integrations/dashboard) page and confirm Climate Scheduler is listed, if not click Add Integrations to do so. You may need to reboot at this point.
2. If the Climate Scheduler card still isn't listed when trying to add a card to a dashboard, visit [this](http://homeassistant.local:8123/config/lovelace/resources) url and confirm that something similar to below is on the list.
`/climate_scheduler/static/climate-scheduler-card.js`
3. If it is in the list then visit [this](http://homeassistant.local:8123/climate_scheduler/static/climate-scheduler-card.js) link, you should see a page full of code. 

If all of these prove true it *should* be working, if not please raise an issue for me to investigate.

Commit message:

Develop (#105)
* tracking down a concurrent save bug

* saving for future reference

* First attempt at a HA entity to control schedules

* Release v1.14.7.1b

* as requested, trying to add in compatability for Scheduler Component schedules

* Release v1.14.7.2b

* Update prev/next buttons to follow time (#94)

* touch gets closest point (#95)

* issue 99

* Should be working with scheduler now

* Release v1.14.7.3b

* added a few extra troubleshooting steps

* Issue 101: check previous days nodes

* Release v1.14.7.4b

* Issue 102: Fix event data format

* Issue 102: Fix event data format

* Release v1.14.7.4b

* Making card loading more robust

* Release v1.14.7.5b

* issue 101: fixing the UI

* making time checking more consistent

* Release v1.14.7.6b

* changed the behaviour of event firing

* Release v1.14.7.7b

* updated the changlog ready for merging to main

---------

Co-authored-by: ndrwrbgs <10776890+ndrwrbgs@users.noreply.github.com>

CARD_TROUBLESHOOTING.md, after:

# Climate Scheduler Card Not Found

The most common problem folks seem to see with this is the card not being found after installation, it's a bit hit and miss as to when this occurs and has been a pain to try and fix. 

Steps to troubleshoot:
1. Visit the [integrations](http://homeassistant.local:8123/config/integrations/dashboard) page and confirm Climate Scheduler is listed, if not click Add Integrations to do so. You may need to reboot at this point.
2. If the Climate Scheduler card still isn't listed when trying to add a card to a dashboard, visit [this](http://homeassistant.local:8123/config/lovelace/resources) url and confirm that something similar to below is on the list.
`/climate_scheduler/static/climate-scheduler-card.js`
3. If it is in the list then visit [this](http://homeassistant.local:8123/climate_scheduler/static/climate-scheduler-card.js) link, you should see a page full of code. 
4. Home Assistant has a knack for preventing UI refreshes so it's worth trying to nuke your browser cache. Press F12 to open the Dev Tools in your browser, right click on the refresh button, and choose "clear cache and refresh". 
5. If the above hasn't helped try another reboot, sometimes this is needed for Home Assistant to properly serve the card.

If all of these prove true it *should* be working, if not please raise an issue for me to investigate.
